---
title: Influence and Magic
abrv-title: inf.mag
published: 2022-06-16
tags: theory, religion, term paper
status: complete
---

### Forward
This is a term paper I wrote for my Honors Exposition and Argument class last year. Provided are the two papers which were used as reference.
[Letham's The Ecstasy of Influence](https://harpers.org/archive/2007/02/the-ecstasy-of-influence/) & [Asperm's The Magical Theory of Politics](https://online.ucpress.edu/nr/article/23/4/15/107331/The-Magical-Theory-of-PoliticsMemes-Magic-and-the).

The prompt eludes me, but it seems to the effect of "How did meme magicians and 4chan use the commons?" (enlightening, I know)

### Paper
The creation of online memes is commonly seen as an inconsequential act, but once a malicious motivation is introduced, popularity becomes a large-scale propaganda operation to subtly influence the meme’s audience. Artists and ‘meme magicians’ share in their purpose of creation; both seek to impart their views on the world. The methodology and motivation, however, varies between the two. Letham writes in _The Ecstasy of Influence_ a critique of the commercialization of the commons and analysis of the nature of ownership in art. Asprem, in _The Magical Theory of Politics_, discusses the use of memes and magic in the run up to the 2016 US presidential election. While artists are personal in their motivation, meme magicians are motivated by a divine will to subtly impose their views on others. Artists derive the commons to create novel content, while meme magicians utilize the commons to propagate malicious ideology through derivative, mutative content.

The commons, as referred to in Lethems’ piece, encompass the collective knowledge and existence of a culture. In its most basic sense, Lethem presents the commons through an analogy of a king and a cat; “The world that meets our eye through the lens of a camera was judged to be, with minor exceptions, a sort of public commons, where a cat may look at a king.” (Letham, pg. 236). The king may own his clothes, jewelry, etc, but the cat possesses the image of the king and his clothes, and as an intangible concept, it cannot be taken, sold, or otherwise owned. This perception of the commons as the world that surrounds us, and our perception of it, takes new meaning with the addition of Actor-Network Theory presented in Asprem’s work, wherein the role and nature of reality is impacted by actors within the aforementioned reality; “... chains of emotion linked through bodies, memes, ideas, and verbal statements take on an agency of their own; they are not only mobilized by people reacting instinctively to what which grabs their affective attention in the moment, but precisely because of the snowballing of spontaneous linkages ... ” (Asprem, pg. 35). Asprem refers to this reciprocal relationship between unique agents as ‘affective networking’, and argues that changes propagated through it affect the nature of those participating in it. The commons, as a mixture of collective knowledge and a distributed reality, serves to store a society’s conscious and unconscious knowledge.

The significance of unrelated events within an affective network can become distorted by the overall sentiment or bias of the network. Asprem’s meme magicians have a tendency to mystify and connect real world events with that of internet subculture. This hyperactive pattern recognition between the physical and virtual realities results in ‘magic memes’; causal links between physical events, such as a tragic plane crash in the alps; “... Germanwings Flight 9525 … crashed on 24 March 2015 when the suicidal co-pilot Andreas Lubitz deliberately steered the plane into a peak in the … French Alps, killing all 150 passengers” (Asprem, pg. 25), to fictional events being widely shared in the virtual network at roughly the same time; “Youtubers and 8chan users recognized a similarity between the event and the opening scene of the Batman movie … in which supervillain Bane downs a plane from the inside and escapes” (Asprem, pg. 25). The causal links are a symptom and cause of a recursive ecosystem. Weak links are supplemented with ironic belief and the existence of stronger links, which would later introduce the slippery slope of post-irony. The tendency of the meme magicians’ affective network to find or manufacture significance to support their ideology would eventually result in the deification of this hyperactive pattern recognition.

Rarified events within an affective network mutate the overall sentiment of the network via realized significance. Some events just have incredible odds, and in these circumstances, there is no need to manufacture significance. Unique tagging of messages is central to the 4chan boards, and long sequences of identical numbers are seen as a minor event, referred to as a ‘GET’. Asprem provides an example of one such ‘prophetic’ message; “... a post on 4chan’s /p/ board with the text “Trump will win” achieved the remarkable GET 77777777.” (Asprem, pg. 24). The disbelief that such an event would occur naturally introduces the possibility to the community that there exists a power possible of influencing reality, both virtual and physical. In Asprem’s paper, the imageboard inhabitants personified this deity into ‘Kek’, which itself was an amalgamation and mutation of the commons; the image was derived of a popular frog meme, Pepe, while the name was of an Egyptian deity of primordial darkness, who in greek depiction was presented as a frog headed man. This post-ironic acknowledgement of a malevolent source and an assigned motive of chaos gave new weight to the causal links and rarified events. Any subsequent events were seen as a reinforcement of the deity’s legitimacy and power. The slippery slope of ironic engagement to post-ironic justification enabled religious belief of a manifest power which could actualize change to further the interests of the affective network.

Artists derive from the commons and their own interpretation to produce novel content. Artists, as referenced by Letham’s work, create out of a need to impart the self on the many; “For so many artists, the act of creativity is intended as a Napoleonic imposition of one’s uniqueness upon the universe …” (Letham, pg. 24). While most art has parts derived from the commons, the aim of most artists is to create something unique to establish legacy and attach recognition to their name. Letham provides examples of artists seeking to create something unique, but their final work having portions of it directly or indirectly influenced, regardless of stated intent, by previous work or concepts; this is referred to as ‘cryptomnesia’. “Dylan’s art offers a paradox: while it famously urges us not to look back, it also encodes a knowledge of past sources that might otherwise have little home in contemporary culture … Dylan’s originality and his appropriations are as one.” (Letham, pg. 233). Bob Dylan’s work, referenced in this example, has a characteristic theme of “not looking back”, which Letham uses as a metaphor for artists’ paradoxical use of the commons with the intention of novelty. Of course it’s possible to create something unique, but is it possible to create something new? The commons thus provides a set of reference material for artists; it could be argued that the artists are less creators and more so linkers (which is creation in its own right, and another paradox), but this is beyond the scope of this paper. Artists manipulate and draw from the commons to create significance with others, linking themselves and others to ideas; making the world bigger. Artists inhabit a similar existence to meme magicians through the commons, which in itself acts as a sort of an affective-network; “The closest resemblance [to art] is to the commons of a language: altered by every contributor, expanded by even the most passive user” (Letham, pg. 244). The linking furthering the network’s propagation is between the self and the masses, rather than the physical and virtual.

Meme magicians derive the commons, mutate, and link their contents to support and propagate their ideology to the masses to impart actual impact. In Asprem’s work, the meme magicians are the imageboard users who utilized memes, through the commons, to share divisive views, including hate speech, to a wider internet audience in the lead up to the 2016 presidential election. The ‘magic’ portion of the terms refers to the “... Hyperactive pattern recognition in the context of high-speed posting …” on the image boards, “... giving rise to synchro-nistic meanings connecting memes posted on the imageboards to events in the external world.” (Apsrem, pg. 25). The meme magician’s ideology is under the guise of post-irony; ironic participation becomes unironic identification. Post-irony provides a layer of plausible deniability, allowing a prepretuator to claim ironic participation while simultaneously beginning to believe in the ideology. Post-ironic posting became a cornerstone of the methodology used by Asprem’s meme magicians, akin to the rationale behind their use of the commons; allowing divisive commentary to spread among innocuous media to the greater public, indoctrinating more people. Hostile takeover of the commons; most clearly demonstrated in the hijacking of a frog meme, demonstrates this; “In 2016, a group of users on the 4chan /pol/board (/pol/ standing for “politically incorrect,” ... attempted to hijack Pepe by systematically producing memes that associated the frog with extreme-right views … and plastering these memes all over the internet.” (Asprem, pg. 23). Pepe was a non-political meme used by the internet community as an anthropomorphism of themselves; the 4chan campaign attempted, successfully, to change the way people thought about a very popular image, and all the images containing it. The mutation of an innocuous meme into a signal for far-right ideology represents the hostile use of the commons.

Is the nature of the commons binary? Can there be ‘good’ and ‘bad’ content in the context of an affective network? Creation, even when derived from mutation, can be seen as a growth of the commons whose value is subjective. Take the example of Van Goh, whose genius was only realised after his death. In no way am I equating the masterful art of Van Goh to images of frogs on the internet encoding hate speech, but Van Goh’s work does highlight the unstable nature of public sentiment regarding the commons. Fundamentally, the meme magicians simply link between rarified events in their virtual and physical worlds to propagate hateful ideology. But it is at what point this linking becomes its own form of creation that the line between artists and meme magicians begins to blur. Artists as described in Lethem’s work are individuals; many have their own demons and own prejudices. The designation of an artist and a crude artist; eg. meme magician, more so relies on the value of which their content evokes in the society. Banksy transformed from a crude artist; a graffiti tagger, to a world renown artist based solely on public opinion in the merit of his work. Within the imageboard from which they began, Asprem’s meme magicians are surely seen as artists; the hijacking of Pepe is viewed less of a hostile takeover of the commons and more a creative reimagination of which to identify with. Artists’ and meme magicians' respective content represent two sides to the commons, but the distinction between the two is dependent on public perception.